Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

Available Online at www.ijcsmc.com

International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing
A Monthly Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology

ISSN 2320–088X
IJCSMC, Vol. 3, Issue. 3, March 2014, pg.1080 – 1087
RESEARCH ARTICLE

5G Technology-Evolution and Revolution
Meenal G. Kachhavay[1]

Ajay P.Thakare[2]

1

M.E. [I st year] C.S.E. Sipna College of Engineering, Amravati

2

Head of Department, Electronics and Telecommunication, Sipna College of Engineering, Amravati
1

meenalrajput17@ymail.com

2

apthakare40@rediffmail.com

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Abstract: In this paper, an attempt has been made to review various existing generations of
mobile wireless technology in terms of their portals, performance, advantages and
disadvantages. The paper throws light on the evolution and development of various
generations of mobile wireless technology along with their significance and advantages of one
over the other. In the past few decades, mobile wireless technologies have experience 4 or 5
generations of technology revolution and evolution, namely from 1G to 4G.Current research
in mobile wireless technology concentrates on advance implementation of 4G technology and
5G technology. Currently 5G term is not officially used. In 5G research is being made on
development of World Wide Wireless Web (WWWW), Dynamic Adhoc Wireless Networks
(DAWN) and Real Wireless World. In this paper we propose novel network architecture for
next generation 5G mobile networks.. In the proposed architecture the mobile terminal has the
possibility to change the Radio Access Technology - RAT based on certain user criteria.
KEY CONCEPT: Evolution from 1G-5G, 5G Network Architecture, Need of 5G
© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1080

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

I.

INTRODUCTION

Mobile wireless industry has started its technology creation, revolution and evolution since early 1970s. In the past
few decades, mobile wireless technologies have experience 4 or 5 generations of technology revolution and
evolution. [1] The telecommunication service in World had a great leap within last few years. 6 billion people own
mobile phones so we are going to analyze the various generations of cellular systems as studied in the evolution of
mobile communications from 1st generation to 5th generation. We can analyze that this could be due to increase in
the telecom customers day by day. In the present time, there are four generations in the mobile industry. These are
respectively 1G- the first generation, 2G- the second generation, 3G- the third generation, and then the 4G- the forth
generation,5G-the fifth second generation.[1] Now days different wireless and mobile technologies are present such
as third generation mobile networks (UMTS- Universal Mobile Telecommunication System, cdma2000), LTE
(Long Term Evolution), Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11 wireless networks), WiMAX (IEEE 802.16 wireless and mobile
networks), as well as sensor networks, or personal area networks (e.g. Bluetooth, ZigBee). Mobile terminals include
variety of interfaces like GSM which are based on circuit switching. All wireless and mobile networks implements
all-IP principle, that means all data and signaling will be transferred via IP (Internet Protocol) on network layer.
Fifth generation technology provide facilities like camera, MP3 recording, video player, large phone memory, audio
player etc. that user never imagine and for children rocking fun with Bluetooth technology and Piconets. The fifth
generation wireless mobile multimedia internet networks can be completely wireless communication without
limitation, which makes perfect wireless real world – World Wide Wireless Web (WWWW). Fifth generation is
based on 4G technologies. The 5th wireless mobile internet networks are real wireless world which shall be
supported by LAS-CDMA (Large Area Synchronized Code-Division Multiple Access), OFDM (Orthogonal
frequency-division multiplexing), MCCDMA (Multi-Carrier Code Division Multiple Access), UWB (Ultrawideband), Network-LMDS (Local Multipoint Distribution Service), and IPv6. Fifth generation technologies offers
tremendous data capabilities and unrestricted call volumes and infinite data broadcast together within latest mobile
operating system. Fifth generation should make an important difference and add more services and benefits to the
world over 4G. Fifth generation should be more intelligent technology that interconnects the entire world without
limits. This generation is expected to be released around 2020. The world of universal, uninterrupted access to
information, entertainment and communication will open new dimension to our lives and change our life style
significantly. [2]

Fig 1: Wireless Communication System

II.
EVOLUTION OF MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES
Mobile communication has become more popular in last few years due to fast revolution in mobile technology. This
revolution is due to very high increase in telecoms customers. This revolution is from 1G- the first generation, 2Gthe second generation, 3G- the third generation, and then the 4G- the forth generation,5G-the fifth second
generation. [2]
© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1081

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

Fig : Evolutional Changes in Mobile Technologies[7]
A. First Generation(1G):
1G emerged in 1980s.It contains analog system and popularly known as cell phones. It introduces mobile
technologies such as mobile telephone system (MTS),Advanced mobile telephone system(AMTS),Improved mobile
telephone system(IMTS)and push to talk(PTT).It uses analog radio signal which have frequency 150 MHz, Voice
call modulation is done using a technique called frequency division multiple access(FDMA).It has low capacity ,
unreliable handoff, poor voice links and no security at all since voice calls were played back in radio towers making
these calls susceptible to unwanted eavesdropping by third parties[2].
B. Second Generation (2G):
2G emerged in late 1980s. It uses digital signals for voice transmission and has speed of 64 kbps. It provides facility
of SMS (Short Message Service) and use the bandwidth of 30 to 200 KHz. Next to 2G, 2.5G system uses packet
switched and circuit switched domain and provide data rate up to 144 kbps. E.g. GPRS, CDMA and EDGE [2]
C. Third Generation (3G):
It uses Wide Brand Wireless Network with which clarity is increased. The data are sent through the technology
called Packet Switching. Voice calls are interpreted through Circuit Switching. Along with verbal communication it
includes data services, access to television/video, new services like Global Roaming. It operates at a range of
2100MHz and has a bandwidth of 15-20MHz used for High-speed internet service, video chatting.3G uses Wide
Band Voice Channel that is by this the world has been contracted to a little village because a person can contact with
other person located in any part of the world and can even send messages too[2].
D. Fourth Generation (4G):
4G offers a downloading speed of 100Mbps.4G provides same feature as 3G and additional services like MultiMedia Newspapers, to watch T.V programs with more clarity and send Data much faster than previous generations
[3]. LTE (Long Term Evolution) is considered as 4G technology. 4G is being developed to accommodate the QoS
and rate requirements set by forthcoming applications like wireless broadband access, Multimedia Messaging
Service (MMS), video chat, mobile TV, HDTV content, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), minimal services like
voice and data, and other services that utilize bandwidth. [2]
E. Fifth Generation (5G):
5G Technology stands for 5th Generation Mobile technology. 5G mobile technology has changed the means to use
cell phones within very high bandwidth. User never experienced ever before such a high value technology.
Nowadays mobile users have much awareness of the cell phone (mobile) technology. The 5G technologies include
all type of advanced features which makes 5G mobile technology most powerful and in huge demand in near future.
A user can also hook their 5G technology cell phone with their Laptop to get broadband internet access. 5G
technology including camera, MP3 recording, video player, large phone memory, dialing speed, audio player and
much more you never imagine. For children rocking fun Bluetooth technology and Piconets has become in market
[1].

© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1082

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

Fig : 5G Mobile Phone [3]
III.
5G NETWORKS
5G network is very fast and reliable. The concept of hand held devices is going to be revolutionized with the advent
of 5G. Now all the services and applications are going to be accessed by single IP as telephony, gaming and many
other multimedia applications. As it is not a new thing in market and there are millions of users all over the world
who have experienced the wireless services wireless technology. It is not easy for them to shrink from using this
new 5G network technology. There is only need to make it accessible so that a common man can easily afford the
profitable packs offered by the companies so that 5G network could hold the authentic place. There is need to win
the customer trust to build fair long term relation to make a reliable position in the telecommunication field. To
complete with the preceding wireless technologies in the market 5G network has to tender something reliable
something more pioneering. All the features like telephony, camera, mp3 player, are coming in new mobile phone
models. 4G is providing all these utility in mobile phone. By seeing the features of 4G one can gets a rough idea
about what 5G Networks could offer. There is messenger, photo gallery, and multimedia applications that are also
going to be the part of 5G. There would be no difference between a PC and a mobile phone rather both would act
vice versa [3].
IV.
DESIGN OF 5G MOBILE NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
Figure 9 shows the system model that proposes design of network architecture for 5G mobile systems, which is allIP based model for wireless and mobile networks interoperability. The system consists of a user terminal (which has
a crucial role in the new architecture) and a number of independent, autonomous radio access technologies. Within
each of the terminals, each of the radio access technologies is seen as the IP link to the outside Internet world.
However, there should be different radio interface for each Radio Access Technology (RAT) in the mobile terminal.
For an example, if we want to have access to four different RATs, we need to have four different access - specific
interfaces in the mobile terminal, and to have all of them active at the same time, with aim to have this architecture
to be functional. [9].
The first two OSI levels (data-link and physical levels) are defining the radio access technologies through which
is provided access to the Internet with more or less QoS support mechanisms, which is further dependent upon the
access technology (e.g., 3G and WiMAX have explicit QoS support, while WLAN has not) . Then, over the OSI-1
and OSI-2 layers is the network layer, and this layer is IP (Internet Protocol) in today’s communication world, either
IPv4 or IPv6, regardless of the radio access technology. The purpose of IP is to ensure enough control data (in IP
header) for proper routing of IP packets belonging to a certain application connections - sessions between client
applications and servers somewhere on the Internet. Routing of packets should be carried out in accordance with
established policies of the user [9].

© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1083

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

Fig : 5G Mobile Network Architecture

Fig : Protocol Layout for the Elements of the Proposed Architecture
© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1084

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

Application connections are realized between clients and servers in the Internet via sockets. Internet sockets are
endpoints for data communication flows. Each socket of the web is a unified and unique combination of local IP
address and appropriate local transport communications port, target IP address and target appropriate
communication port, and type of transport protocol. Considering that, the establishment of communication from end
to end between the client and server using the Internet protocol is necessary to raise the appropriate Internet socket
uniquely determined by the application of the client and the server. This means that in case of interoperability
between heterogeneous networks and for the vertical handover between the respective radio technologies, the local
IP address and destination IP address should be fixed and unchanged. Fixing of these two parameters should ensure
handover transparency to the Internet connection end-to-end, when there is a mobile user at least on one end of such
connection. In order to preserve the proper layout of the packets and to reduce or prevent packets losses, routing to
the target destination and vice versa should be uniquely and using the same path. Each radio access technology that
is available to the user in achieving connectivity with the relevant radio access is presented with appropriate IP
interface. Each IP interface in the terminal is characterized by its IP address and net mask and parameters associated
with the routing of IP packets across the network. In regular inter-system handover the change of access technology
(i.e., vertical handover) would mean changing the local IP address. Then, change of any of the parameters of the
socket means and change of the socket, that is, closing the socket and opening a new one. This means, ending the
connection and starting e new one. This approach is not-flexible, and it is based on today’s Internet communication.
In order to solve this deficiency we propose a new level that will take care of the abstraction levels of network
access technologies to higher layers of the protocol stack. This layer is crucial in the new architecture. To enable the
functions of the applied transparency and control or direct routing of packets through the most appropriate radio
access technology, in the proposed architecture we introduce a control system in the functional architecture of the
networks, which works in complete coordination with the user terminal and provides a network abstraction functions
and routing of packets based on defined policies. At the same time this control system is an essential element
through which it can determine the quality of service for each transmission technology. He is on the Internet side of
the proposed architecture, and as such represents an ideal system to test the qualitative characteristics of the access
technologies, as well as to obtain a realistic picture regarding the quality that can be expected from applications of
the user towards a given server in Internet (or peer). Protocol setup of the new levels within the existing protocol
stack, which form the proposed architecture, is presented in Figure 2. The network abstraction level would be
provided by creating IP tunnels over IP interfaces obtained by connection to the terminal via the access technologies
available to the terminal (i.e., mobile user). In fact, the tunnels would be established between the user terminal and
control system named here as Policy Router, which performs routing based on given policies. In this way the client
side will create an appropriate number of tunnels connected to the number of radio access technologies, and the
client will only set a local IP address which will be formed with sockets Internet communication of client
applications with Internet servers. The way IP packets are routed through tunnels, or choosing the right tunnel,
would be served by policies whose rules will be exchanged via the virtual network layer protocol. This way we
achieve the required abstraction of the network to the client applications at the mobile terminal. The process of
establishing a tunnel to the Policy Router, for routing based on the policies, are carried out immediately after the
establishment of IP connectivity across the radio access technology, and it is initiated from the mobile terminal
Virtual Network-level Protocol. Establishing tunnel connections as well as maintaining them represents basic
functionality of the virtual network level (or network level of abstraction)[9].
V.
WHY IS 5G REQUIRED?
The major difference, from a user point of view, between current generations and expected 5G techniques must be
something else than increased maximum throughput; other requirements include:
•Lower out age probability; better coverage and high data rates available at cell edge.
•Lower battery consumption.
•Multiple concurrent data transfer paths.
•Around 1Gbps data rate in mobility.
•More secure; better cognitive radio/SDR Security.
•Higher system level spectral efficiency.
•World Wide wireless web (WWWW).
•More applications combined with artificial intelligent (AI) as human life will be surrounded by artificial sensors
which could be communicating with mobile phones. Not harmful to human health.
•Cheaper traffic fees due to low infra structure deployment costs[3].

© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1085

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

VI.
CHARACTERISTICS OF 5G TECHNOLOGY
• The technology 5G presents the high resolution for sharp, passionate cell phone every day and give consumers
well shape and fast Internet access.
• The 5G technology provides billing limits in advance that the more beautiful and successful of the modern era.
• The 5G technology also allows users of mobile phones, cell phone records for printing
operations.
• The 5G technology for large volume data distribution in Gigabit, which also maintains close ties to almost 65,000.
• The technology gives you 5G carrier distribution gateways to unprecedented maximum stability without delay.
• The information from the data transfer technology 5G organize a more accurate and reliable results.
• Using remote control technology to get the consumer can also get a 5G comfort and relax by having a better speed
and clarity in less time alone.
• The 5G technology also support virtual private network.
• The uploading and downloading speed of 5G technology touching the peak.
• The 5G technology network offering enhanced and available connectivity just about the world.
• 5G network is very fast and reliable.
VII.
APPLICATIONS OF 5G TECHNOLOGY
1) Real wireless world with no more limitation with access and zone issues.
2) Wearable devices with AI capabilities.
3) Internet protocol version 6(IPv6), where a visiting care-of mobile IP address is assigned according to location and
connected network.
4) One unified global standard.
5) Pervasive networks providing ubiquitous computing: The user can simultaneously be connected to several
wireless access technologies and seamlessly move between them these access technologies can be a 2.5G,3G, 4G or
5G mobile networks, Wi-Fi, WPAN or any other future access technology. In 5G, the concept may be further
developed into multiple concurrent data transfer paths.
6) Cognitive radio technology, also known as smart radio: allowing different radio technologies to share the same
spectrum efficiently by adaptively finding unused spectrum and adapting the transmission scheme to the
requirements of the technologies currently sharing the spectrum. This dynamic radio resource management is
achieved in a distributed fashion, and relies on software defined radio.
7) High altitude stratospheric platform station (HAPS) Systems. The radio interface of 5G communication systems
is suggested in a Korean research and development program to be based on beam division multiple access (BDMA)
and group cooperative relay techniques.[8]
VIII. FUTURE SCOPE
Beyond 5g:
The future enhancement of Nano-core will be incredible as it combines with artificial intelligent (AI).One can able
to control his intelligent Robot using his mobile phone. Your Mobile can automatically type the message what your
brain thinks. We might get a circumstance where we don’t require any spectrum for communication. The Google hot
trends have rated the term 6G as the 17th most searched word in the search engines. The iPod 6G comes in seven
different colors and has an aluminum body which makes the body strong to with stand constant daily usage. It has a
clip on design like iPod shuffle and it attached to shirt firmly. 6G technology haven’t been fully revealed yet but
search phrases like what is 6G mobile technology, 6G technology, 6G mobile, 6G network, 6G wiki, 6G technology
ppt. are getting more familiar with new mobile technology getting evolved.
IX.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we conclude that 5G network is very fast and reliable. Fifth generation is based on 4G technologies.
The 5th wireless mobile internet networks are real wireless world which shall be supported by LAS-CDMA (Large
Area Synchronized Code-Division Multiple Access),OFDM (Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing),
MCCDMA(Multi-Carrier Code Division Multiple Access), UWB(Ultra-wideband), Network-LMDS( Local
Multipoint Distribution Service), and IPv6. Fifth generation technologies offers tremendous data capabilities and
unrestricted call volumes and infinite data broadcast together within latest mobile operating system. Fifth generation
should make an important difference and add more services and benefits to the world over 4G. Fifth generation
should be more intelligent technology that interconnects the entire world without limits. This generation is expected
to be released around 2020. The world of universal, uninterrupted access to information, entertainment and
communication will open new dimension to our lives and change our life style significantly.
© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1086

Meenal G. Kachhavay et al, International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, Vol.3 Issue.3, March- 2014, pg. 1080-1087

REFERENCES
1. Aleksandar Tudzarov and Toni Janevski, “Functional Architecture for 5G Mobile Networks” International
Journal of Advanced Science and Technology Vol. 32, July, 2011.
2. Ms. Neha Dumbre, Ms. Monali Patwa, Ms. Kajal Patwa, “5G WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES-Still 4G
auction not over, but time to start talking 5G” International Journal of Science, Engineering and
Technology Research (IJSETR) Volume 2, Issue 2, February 2013.
3. Akhilesh Kumar Pachauri and Ompal Singh, “5G Technology – Redefining wireless Communication in
upcoming Years” International Journal of Computer Science and Management Research Vol 1 Issue 1 Aug
2012 ISSN 2278 – 733X.
4. Ms. Reshma S. Sapakal, Ms. Sonali S. Kadam, “5G Mobile Technology” International Journal of
Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET) Volume 2, Issue 2, February
2013.
5. Suvarna Patil, Vipin Patil, .Pallavi Bhatt, “A Review on 5G Technology” International Journal of
Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT) Volume 1, Issue 1,January 2012.
6. Professor T.Venkat Narayana Rao, Aasha S. A. and Sravya Tirumalaraju, “5G TECHNOLOGIES – AN
ANECDOTE OF NETWORK SERVICE FOR THE FUTURE” Volume 2, No. 7, July 2011 Journal of
Global Research in Computer Science.
7. Saddam Hossain, “5G Wireless Communication Systems” American Journal of Engineering Research
(AJER) e-ISSN: 2320-0847 p-ISSN: 2320-0936 Volume-02, Issue-10, pp-344-353 www.ajer.org.

© 2014, IJCSMC All Rights Reserved

1087

